Rabies is a frightening disease, marked by horrifying symptoms, including intense pain and suffering, biting behaviour which can pose a lethal threat to loved ones, and virtually certain mortality. Rabies also poses severe financial burdens on rural villages, where vaccination to protect bite victims (and associated trips to medical centers) can use a large portion of a family's income ((CleaLiving)).

The mainstream scientific and public health communities have seen large changes in how rabies is viewed over the last 10 years. Virtually all (95-99%) human cases of rabies are due to canine strains ((Abela_Ridder_LancetGH)), which are driven primarily by spread among domestic dog populations. Domestic-dog spread can be effectively prevented by vaccination, and canine rabies is no longer a public-health threat in wealthier parts of the world. By the turn of the century, public-health attention to rabies had languished, and scientific attention tended to focus on threats posed to people by wildlife rabies in developed countries (e.g., fox and raccoon rabies in North America, ((RealPNAS))) and on threats _to_ endangered wildlife (e.g., Ethiopian wolves ((CITE??)).

Recent years have seen increasing understanding of the fact that rabies causes significant mortality and financial burdens, and that canine rabies (and with it a great majority of these burdens) is eminently preventable, via concerted and consistent vaccination of domestic dogs. The scientific community has increasingly embraced dog rabies as an interesting and important field of study, and the public-health community has ramped up control efforts, leading to striking control successes, particularly in the Americas, and to WHO endorsement of the goal of eliminating deaths from "dog-mediated" rabies by 2030 ((Abela_Ridder_LancetGH)).

This article discusses a series of papers published starting in 2007, by a group centered around Katie Hampson, Magai Kaare and Tiziana Lembo. The papers are based on ground-breaking work that they did tracing canine rabies in Tanzania, as well as analyses of data from other parts of the world. The group has continued to be involved in fighting canine rabies throughout the world (with the exception of Kaare, who died in 2008 in a car accident in Tanzania). I played a minor role in most of these studies, and was listed as an author on some them.

A 2007 review of published and government data ((Synchrony)) showed that rabies cycled with a period of 3-6 years across southern and eastern Africa, and that these cycles were geographically synchronized across the region, suggesting that . The study also used a mathematical model to show that these cycles were too fast to be easily explained simply by the interaction of disease dynamics and dog demography (births and deaths), but that they _could_ be easily explained by adding the effect of "reactive vaccination" – in other words, if dog vaccination campaigns were not consistent, but increased in response to outbreaks, and declined thereafter. The authors suggested that consistent and co-ordinated vaccination campaigns could have the potential to eliminate canine rabies in this large region, where much of the rabies burden is concentrated. 

This optimistic prediction received substantial support from a 2008 study of rabies in Serengeti District, Tanzania ((reservoir)). This study focused on rabies spread between different species of carnivores in an area with a large number of wild carnivores. The authors used genetic and spatiotemporal data to infer how rabies spread between species, and found that maintenance of rabies in this system was dependent on spread within the domestic-dog community. They argued that since this community was chosen for its unusually large amount of interaction between wild carnivores and domestic dogs, this finding implied that domestic dogs were likely the key to maintenance of canine rabies throughout Africa.

The group was actively involved in both promoting and studying vaccination campaigns. A 2009 paper ((strategy)) laid out their findings from the Serengeti district, a medium-density area with an economy based on agriculture and livestock, similar to large areas of rural Africa, and from the neighboring Ngorongoro district, with a more traditional economy based only on livestock. They found that organized "central-point" campaigns, where residents are encouraged to bring dogs to a vaccination center at a pre-announced time were highly effective, and cost effective, in the Serengeti district. In the Ngorongoro district, achieving high coverage was both more difficult and more expensive, but still affordable (around $5 per dog). This study also found that the proportion of feral dogs (dogs not owned by humans) was low, even in these very rural areas.
